[DOCS-6807] Historical Metrics Ingestion (#20809)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/metrics/custom_metrics/historical_metrics.md

---
title: Historical Metrics Ingestion
kind: documentation
further_reading:
- link: "/developers/dogstatsd/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Learn more about DogStatsD"
- link: "/developers/community/libraries/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Official and Community created API and DogStatsD client libraries"
---

## Overview

> Historical Metrics Ingestion allows you to collect metric points with outdated timestamps. Timestamps that are older than one hour from the time of submission, but no older than your total metric retention period (which defaults to 15 months for all metrics).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enabling Historical Metrics Ingestion allows you to collect metric values with timestamps older than one hour from the time of submission, but no older than your total metric retention period (default of 15 months).
```

> With Historical Metrics Ingestion, you can monitor a variety of new use cases with your metrics, such as outage recovery, overwriting invalid metrics, and managing IoT delays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having Historical Metrics Ingestion enabled on your metrics can be helpful for a variety of use cases such as recovering from an outage, correcting erroneous values, and managing IoT delays.
```

## What is Historical Metric Ingestion?

{{< img src="metrics/custom_metrics/historical_metrics/diagram_historical-metrics-ingestion_intro.png" alt="Diagram showing the ingestion flow for Historical Metrics" >}}

> Datadog classifies *historical metrics* as metric points with timestamps that are older than an hour relative to the time of submission. 

Reviewer 2: Metrics with historical metric ingestion enabled in Datadog can have values with timestamps that are _older_ than one hour relative to the time those values were submitted. Without historical metric ingestion enabled, the timestamps on your metric values' timestamps must be < one hour ago relative to the time those values are submitted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Datadog classifies *historical metrics* as metric points with timestamps that are older than an hour relative to the time of submission. If Historical Metrics Ingestion is not enabled, metrics older than an hour from submission will not be ingested.
```

> For example, you emit a metric point at 1:00 PM EST, and the timestamp on that point reads 10:00 AM EST. This metric point is classified as a historical metric because it is delayed by 3 hours relative to the time of submission.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, your metric (`exampleMetricA`) emits a value to Datadog at 1:00 PM EST, and the timestamp on that value is 10:00 AM EST. This metric value is classified as a _historical_ because it has a timestamp 3 hours older relative to the time of submission.
```

> Metric points that are resent with the same timestamp and tag-value combination within Datadog are replaced with a *"last point wins"* ingestion rule. If you send a metric with a value of 5, and resend that metric with a value of 10, both with the same timestamp, the 10 replaces the 5 as the value of the metric.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your historical metrics ingestion enabled metric submits several values with the same timestamp and same tag-value combination to Datadog, Datadog will preserve the most recent ingested value. That is, If within the same timestamp, you submit a metric with a value of 5, and also send that metric with a value of 10, whichever value is the most recently submitted will be preserved.
```

> You can start ingesting historical metrics by configuring Historical Metrics Ingestion on the [Metrics Summary Page][1] for *counts, rates, and gauges*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can start ingesting historical metric values by enabling Historical Metrics Ingestion on the [Metrics Summary Page][1] for *counts, rates, and gauges* metric types. Historical Metrics Ingestion is not yet available for distribution metrics.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can start ingesting historical metric values by enabling Historical Metrics Ingestion on the [Metrics Summary Page][1] for *counts, rates, and gauges* metric types.  **Note**: Historical Metrics Ingestion is not available for distribution metrics.
```

## Configuration

To enable the ingestion of historical metrics for a specific metric:
1. Navigate to the [Metrics Summary Page][1].
1. Click the name of the metric you want to enable Historical Metrics Ingestion for. 
1. On the metric side panel that opens up, under the **Advanced** section find the option for *Historical Data*. 
1. Click **Configure**.
1. Select **Enable historical metrics** and press **Save**.

{{< img src="metrics/custom_metrics/historical_metrics/enable_historical_metrics.png" alt="Metrics Summary page showing the Historical Metrics facets panel and the Advanced section of an open Metric detail panel with the Enable historical metrics option selected" style="width:100%;" >}}

> ### Bulk configuration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Bulk configuration for multiple metrics
```

> To optimize your historical metrics enablement, take advantage of the Bulk Historical Metric Enablement feature. You can enable Historical Metrics Ingestion for multiple metrics at once, rather than having to configure each one individually.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can enable Historical Metrics Ingestion for multiple metrics at once, rather than having to configure each one individually.
```

> 1. Navigate to the Navigate to the [Metrics Summary Page][1] and click the **Configured Metrics** dropdown.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1.  Navigate to the [Metrics Summary Page][1] and click the **Configured Metrics** dropdown.
```

1. Select **Enable historical metrics**.

> 1. Configure all metrics that match that namespace to enable historical metrics ingestion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Specify a metric namespace prefix to enable historical metrics ingestion on all metrics that match that namespace.
```

> {{< img src="metrics/custom_metrics/historical_metrics/enable_bulk_historical_metrics.mp4" alt="Walkthrough of bulk enabling historic metric ingestion" video=true >}}

Reviewer 2: Can we have a video of bulk config with a metric namespace prefix that matches more than just one metric name?

## Historical metrics submission

> You can submit historical metrics through the [API](#api) or through the [Agent](#agent). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After enabling historical metrics ingestion, you can submit metric values with historical timestamps through the [API](#api) or through the [Agent](#agent). 
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After enabling Historical Metrics Ingestion, you can submit metric values with historical timestamps through the [API](#api) or through the [Agent](#agent).
```

### API 

> With the API, you can include metric points with old timestamps in the payload, as long as the metric name for the point has been configured to accept historical metrics through the user interface.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the API, you can include metric points with historical timestamps in the payload (as long as the metric name for the point has been configured to accept historical metrics through the user interface).
```

	}

  ts := time.Date(2008, time.March, 17, 23, 0, 0, 0, time.UTC)
	statsd.GaugeWithTimestamp("example_metric.gauge_with_timestamp", 12, []string{"environment:dev"}, 1, ts)
  statsd.CountWithTimestamp("example_metric.count_with_timestamp", 12, []string{"environment:dev"}, 1, ts)
}
```
{{< /programming-lang >}}

{{< programming-lang lang=".NET" >}}
```csharp
using StatsdClient;

public class DogStatsdClient
{
    public static void Main()
    {
        var dogstatsdConfig = new StatsdConfig
        {
            StatsdServerName = "127.0.0.1",
            StatsdPort = 8125,
        };

        using (var dogStatsdService = new DogStatsdService())
        {
            dogStatsdService.Configure(dogstatsdConfig);
            var random = new Random(0);
            var dto = new DateTimeOffset(2008, 03, 17, 23, 00, 00, new TimeSpan(0, 0, 0))
            dogStatsdService.Gauge("example_metric.gauge_with_timestamp", 10, tags: new[] {"environment:dev"}, dto);
            dogStatsdService.Counter("example_metric.count_with_timestamp", 10, tags: new[] {"environment:dev"}, dto);
        }
    }
}
```
{{< /programming-lang >}}

{{< /programming-lang-wrapper >}}

## Ingestion latency

> Ingesting historical metrics includes some ingestion latencies. These latencies can be caused by the delay associated with the metric timestamp.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Historical metrics ingestion has varying latency depending on how far in the past your metrics' timestamps are.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Historical Metrics Ingestion has varying latency depending on how far in the past your metrics' timestamps are.```

| Metric Delayed by:   | Ingestion Latency                     |
|----------------------|---------------------------------------|
| 1-12 hours           | Near Real-Time Ingestion (1 hour MAX) |
| 12 hours - 30 days   | Up to 14 hour latency                 |
| +30 days             | +14 hours latency                     |

{{< img src="metrics/custom_metrics/historical_metrics/diagram_historical-metrics-ingestion_latency.png" alt="Diagram showing how Historical Metrics can take longer to ingest depending on the metric timestamp">}}

> ## Ingestion billing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Historical Metric Ingestion Billing
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Historical Metrics Ingestion Billing
```

> Historical Metrics are billed under the Custom Metrics billing SKU. Billable custom metrics are determined by the timestamp of the metrics submitted, regardless of whether they are submitted today or 12 months later. For more information, see the [Custom Metrics billing][3] documentation.

Reviewer 2: Hmm even I'm confused here. The mainpoint should be that we haven't added any new line item / SKU to customer's contracts -- it solely may impact their billable volume of indexed custom metrics no? And just because a metric has historical metrics ingestion enabled and it's submitting a metric value with a timestamp 3 months ago, as long as that metric name / tag value combination was actively reporting ANY value (regardless of the timestamp), it'd be considered active in the hour that it was actively reporting any value no?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Historical Metrics are billed under the Custom Metrics billing SKU. Billable custom metrics are determined by the timestamp of the metrics submitted, regardless of whether they have a timestamp of today or 15 months into the past. As long as that metric name and tag value combination is actively reporting ANY value (regardless of the timestamp), it would be considered active in the hour that it was submitted. For more information, see the [Custom Metrics billing][3] documentation.
```

> {{< img src="metrics/custom_metrics/historical_metrics/diagram_historical-metrics-ingestion_billing.png" alt="Diagram showing how Historical Metrics is billed based on the timestamp of the metric" >}}

Reviewer 2: This image has too much going on for even me to patiently comb through and understand 😓  and it's a bit misleading because the bolded number of billable custom metrics is only valid for that one hour...but the customer's bill is averaged over all 730 hours in a month

---
title: Historical Metrics Ingestion
kind: documentation
further_reading:
- link: "https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/historical-metrics/"
  tag: "Blog"
  text: "Monitor system performance across longer time frames with historical metrics"
- link: "/developers/dogstatsd/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Learn more about DogStatsD"
- link: "/developers/community/libraries/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Official and Community created API and DogStatsD client libraries"
---

## Overview

Enabling Historical Metrics Ingestion allows you to collect metric values with timestamps older than one hour from the time of submission, but no older than your total metric retention period (default of 15 months).

Having Historical Metrics Ingestion enabled on your metrics can be helpful for a variety of use cases such as recovering from an outage, correcting erroneous values, and managing IoT delays.

## What is Historical Metrics Ingestion?

> {{< img src="metrics/custom_metrics/historical_metrics/diagram_historical-metrics-ingestion_intro.png" alt="Diagram showing the ingestion flow for Historical Metrics" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Datadog classifies *historical metrics* as metric points with timestamps that are older than an hour relative to the time of submission. If Historical Metrics Ingestion is not enabled, metrics older than an hour from submission are not ingested.

For example, your metric (`exampleMetricA`) emits a value to Datadog at 1:00 PM EST, and the timestamp on that value is 10:00 AM EST. This metric value is classified as _historical_ because it has a timestamp 3 hours older relative to the time of submission.

> Metric points that are resent with the same timestamp and tag-value combination within Datadog are replaced with a *"last point wins"* ingestion rule. If you send a metric with a value of X, and resend that metric with a value of Y, both with the same timestamp, the Y replaces the X as the value of the metric. This is because Y is the most recent submission.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Historical Metrics Ingestion enabled, if you submit metrics with the same timestamp and same tag-value combination to Datadog, Datadog preserves the most recent ingested value. That is, If within the same timestamp, you submit a metric with a value of X, and also send that metric with a value of Y, whichever value is the most recently submitted will be preserved.
```

        {
            StatsdServerName = "127.0.0.1",
            StatsdPort = 8125,
        };

        using (var dogStatsdService = new DogStatsdService())
        {
            dogStatsdService.Configure(dogstatsdConfig);
            var random = new Random(0);
            var dto = new DateTimeOffset(2008, 03, 17, 23, 00, 00, new TimeSpan(0, 0, 0))
            dogStatsdService.Gauge("example_metric.gauge_with_timestamp", 10, tags: new[] {"environment:dev"}, dto);
            dogStatsdService.Counter("example_metric.count_with_timestamp", 10, tags: new[] {"environment:dev"}, dto);
        }
    }
}
```
{{< /programming-lang >}}

{{< /programming-lang-wrapper >}}

## Historical Metrics Ingestion's latency

Historical Metrics Ingestion has varying latency depending on how far in the past your metrics' timestamps are.

| Metric Delayed by:   | Ingestion Latency                     |
|----------------------|---------------------------------------|
| 1-12 hours           | Near Real-Time Ingestion (1 hour MAX) |
| 12 hours - 30 days   | Up to 14 hour latency                 |
| +30 days             | +14 hours latency                     |

> {{< img src="metrics/custom_metrics/historical_metrics/diagram_historical-metrics-ingestion_latency.png" alt="Diagram showing how Historical Metrics can take longer to ingest depending on the metric timestamp">}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

For example, your metric (`exampleMetricA`) emits a value to Datadog at 1:00 PM EST, and the timestamp on that value is 10:00 AM EST. This metric value is classified as _historical_ because it has a timestamp 3 hours older relative to the time of submission.

With Historical Metrics Ingestion enabled, if you submit metrics with the same timestamp and same tag-value combination to Datadog, Datadog preserves the most recent ingested value. That is, If within the same timestamp, you submit a metric with a value of X, and also send that metric with a value of Y, whichever value is the most recently submitted will be preserved.

You can start ingesting historical metric values by enabling Historical Metrics Ingestion on the [Metrics Summary Page][1] for *counts, rates, and gauges* metric types.  **Note**: Historical Metrics Ingestion is not available for distribution metrics.

## Configuration

To enable the ingestion of historical metrics for a specific metric:
1. Navigate to the [Metrics Summary Page][1].

> 1. Click the name of the metric you want to enable Historical Metrics Ingestion for. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click on the metric name you want to enable Historical Metrics Ingestion for to open the metric's details side panel.
```

        {
            StatsdServerName = "127.0.0.1",
            StatsdPort = 8125,
        };

        using (var dogStatsdService = new DogStatsdService())
        {
            dogStatsdService.Configure(dogstatsdConfig);
            var random = new Random(0);
            var dto = new DateTimeOffset(2008, 03, 17, 23, 00, 00, new TimeSpan(0, 0, 0))
            dogStatsdService.Gauge("example_metric.gauge_with_timestamp", 10, tags: new[] {"environment:dev"}, dto);
            dogStatsdService.Counter("example_metric.count_with_timestamp", 10, tags: new[] {"environment:dev"}, dto);
        }
    }
}
```
{{< /programming-lang >}}

{{< /programming-lang-wrapper >}}

## Historical Metrics Ingestion's latency

Historical Metrics Ingestion has varying latency depending on how far in the past your metrics' timestamps are.

| Metric Delayed by:   | Ingestion Latency                     |
|----------------------|---------------------------------------|
| 1-12 hours           | Near Real-Time Ingestion (1 hour MAX) |
| 12 hours - 30 days   | Up to 14 hour latency                 |
| +30 days             | +14 hours latency                     |

> {{< img src="metrics/custom_metrics/historical_metrics/diagram_historical-metrics-ingestion_3_240105.png" alt="Diagram showing how Historical Metrics can take longer to ingest depending on the metric timestamp">}}

Reviewer: Resolution from mtg - remove the diagram, the table provides sufficient information
